---
title: "Taking Bi-Intuitionistic Logic First-Order: A Proof-Theoretic Investigation via Polytree Sequents"
collection: publications
category: conferences
permalink: /publication/2025CSLseq
excerpt: 'It is well-known that extending the Hilbert axiomatic system for first-order intuitionistic 
logic with an exclusion operator, that is dual to implication, collapses the domains of models into
a constant domain. This makes it an interesting problem to find a sound and complete proof system 
for first-order bi-intuitionistic logic with non-constant domains that is also conservative over 
first-order intuitionistic logic. We solve this problem by presenting the first sound and complete 
proof system for first-order bi-intuitionistic logic with increasing domains. We formalize our proof 
system as a polytree sequent calculus (a notational variant of nested sequents), and prove that it 
enjoys cut-elimination and is conservative over first-order intuitionistic logic. A key feature of 
our calculus is an explicit eigenvariable context, which allows us to control precisely the scope of 
free variables in a polytree structure. Semantically this context can be seen as encoding a notion 
of Scott’s existence predicate for intuitionistic logic. This turns out to be crucial to avoid the 
collapse of domains and to prove the completeness of our proof system. The explicit consideration of 
the variable context in a formula sheds light on a previously overlooked dependency between the 
residuation principle and the existence predicate in the first-order setting, which may help to 
explain the difficulty in designing a sound and complete proof system for first-order bi-intuitionistic logic.'
date: 2025-02-03
venue: 'Computer Science Logic 2025'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.CSL.2025.41'
citation: 'Tim Lyon, Shillito, Ian and Tiu, Alwen. (2025). 
&quot;Taking Bi-Intuitionistic Logic First-Order: A Proof-Theoretic Investigation via Polytree Sequents&quot; 
<i>Computer Science Logic 2025</i>.'
---
